developer.md, before:

# Developer notes

This file is a developer-oriented starting point for TopoGen.

## Quick start (skim)

- If you are new here, read:
  - `README.md` (user-facing behavior and examples)
  - `developer.md` (this file)
- Core flow (where to look first):
  - CLI flags: `src/topogen/main.py`
  - Topology + rendering behavior: `src/topogen/render.py`
  - Device configs: `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
- Validate changes:
  - Prefer offline first: generate `--offline-yaml out\<lab>.yaml` and search output with PowerShell `Select-String`.
  - Then (if needed) boot in CML and run basic show commands (see “How to validate changes”).

## What TopoGen is

TopoGen is a Python CLI tool that generates CML labs:

- **Online**: creates labs/nodes/links on a CML controller via the PCL (`virl2-client`).
- **Offline**: writes a CML YAML lab file locally with `--offline-yaml`.

It also renders per-node startup-configs using **Jinja2 templates**.

Terminology:

- `-T` / `--template`: which config template to render (`src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`)
- `--device-template`: which CML node definition to use (e.g., `iosv`, `csr1000v`)

## Authoritative sources of truth

- `src/topogen/render.py`: topology semantics + rendering behavior (authoritative engine)
- `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`: emitted device configuration (what nodes boot with)
- `README.md`: user-facing CLI contract and examples
- `CHANGES.md`: what changed between released versions
- `TODO.md`: in-progress ideas/roadmap (not guaranteed implemented)

## Runtime dependencies (from `pyproject.toml`)

Required:

- `jinja2` (template rendering)
- `virl2-client` (CML controller API client for online mode)
- `pyserde[toml]` (read/write `config.toml`)
- `networkx` (topology logic in some modes)
- `enlighten` (progress bars)

Optional:

- `gooey` (GUI entrypoint)

## Repository layout (what matters)

Required to run:

- `pyproject.toml`
- `src/topogen/`
  - `__init__.py` (package entrypoint exposure)
  - `main.py` (CLI parsing, dispatch)
  - `render.py` (authoritative topology + rendering engine)
  - `config.py` (config model + load/save)
  - `models.py` (dataclasses + `TopogenError`)
  - `templates/` (all `*.jinja2` templates)

Nice to have:

- `README.md` (user docs)
- `CHANGES.md` (release notes)
- `TODO.md` (roadmap)
- `.github/workflows/` (CI)
- `.images/` (demo assets)
- `CONTRIBUTING.md` (contributor workflow)

## Entry points

Defined in `pyproject.toml`:

- `topogen = topogen:main`
- `topogen-gui = topogen.gui:main`

These resolve through `src/topogen/__init__.py` and then into the real logic:

- CLI: `src/topogen/main.py:main()`
- GUI: `src/topogen/gui.py:main()` (wraps the same CLI parsing and then calls `topogen.main.main()`)

## High-level dependency chain (call graph)

When you run `topogen ...`:

1. `src/topogen/main.py`
   - Parses args (argparse)
   - Loads config via `src/topogen/config.py` (`Config.load()`)
   - Selects the topology mode and template
   - Calls into `src/topogen/render.py` (`Renderer`) for online or offline generation

2. `src/topogen/render.py`
   - Builds nodes/links + addressing
   - Loads templates from `src/topogen/templates/` (package resources)
   - Renders per-node configs using Jinja2
   - Either:
     - writes offline YAML, or
     - uses `virl2_client.ClientLibrary` to create/update the lab on a controller

3. `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
   - Produce IOS/IOS-XE configs based on the passed Jinja context (`config`, `node`, and feature flags)

## AI onboarding prompt (copy/paste)

Paste this into a fresh AI session to get it oriented quickly:

```text
You are working in the TopoGen repo (Python 3.12+). Start by reading developer.md.

Goal: implement a small feature or bugfix without breaking existing modes.

Key flow:
- CLI entrypoint: src/topogen/main.py
- Authoritative topology + rendering: src/topogen/render.py
- Device configs: src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2

When adding a feature:
1) add/modify CLI flags in main.py
2) pass the flag into render.py logic and into the Jinja context
3) implement emitted config lines in the relevant template(s)
4) update README.md + CHANGES.md
5) validate with an offline YAML lab and (if applicable) an online controller run

Use the “File pointers” section in developer.md to understand what each file reads/writes/calls.
```

## AI guardrails (default boundaries)

Unless a task explicitly requires otherwise:

- Prefer editing:
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (CLI flags + wiring)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (behavior + Jinja context)
  - `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2` (emitted device config)
  - Docs: `README.md`, `CHANGES.md`, `developer.md`

- Avoid editing (high blast radius) unless asked:
  - `pyproject.toml` (dependencies, entrypoints, packaging metadata)
  - `src/topogen/__init__.py` (entrypoint exposure)
  - `.github/workflows/*` (CI behavior)
  - `.gitignore` (what artifacts get committed)

- Never commit generated artifacts:
  - `out\` (gitignored offline YAML outputs)

## Common tasks -> file chain (LLM-friendly)

- **Add a new CLI flag**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (argparse)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (consume the flag + pass into Jinja context)
  - `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2` (emit config)
  - Docs: `README.md`, `CHANGES.md`

- **Change how addressing/topology is computed**
  - `src/topogen/render.py`
  - `src/topogen/models.py` (only if new per-node/per-link fields are needed)
  - Docs: `README.md` (if user-visible)

- **Change device config text (without changing topology logic)**
  - `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (only if you need to add context variables)

- **Change online (controller) behavior**
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (calls `virl2_client`)
  - Docs: `README.md` (env vars / flags)

- **Change config.toml defaults/parsing**
  - `src/topogen/config.py`
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (wire flags like `--config`, `--write`)

## File pointers (called-by / reads-from / writes-to / calls-into)

The intent of this section is to reduce guesswork.

- For an **AI**, these pointers help answer: “Where do I edit, and what else must I touch?”
- For a **human**, these pointers help answer: “What are the side effects and blast radius of a change?”

### `src/topogen/__init__.py`

- **Called by**
  - Console scripts via `pyproject.toml` entrypoints (`topogen = topogen:main`)
- **Reads from**
  - Package metadata via `importlib.metadata.metadata("topogen")`
- **Writes to**
  - None
- **Calls into**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (exports `main`)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (exports `Renderer`)
  - `src/topogen/config.py` (exports `Config`)

### `src/topogen/main.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/__init__.py` (entrypoint export)
  - `src/topogen/gui.py` (GUI wrapper)
- **Reads from**
  - `config.toml` (or `--config`) via `Config.load()`
  - Environment variables (direct): `LOG_LEVEL`
- **Writes to**
  - stdout/stderr (logging)
  - Delegates offline YAML / online controller changes to `render.py`
- **Calls into**
  - `src/topogen/config.py` (`Config`)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (`Renderer`, `get_templates()`)
  - `src/topogen/models.py` (`TopogenError`)

### `src/topogen/render.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/main.py`
- **Reads from**
  - Packaged templates in `src/topogen/templates/` (via `topogen.templates` package resources)
  - `Config` values (IP pools, credentials, domain)
  - Online controller auth (indirectly via `virl2-client` / environment): `VIRL2_URL`, `VIRL2_USER`, `VIRL2_PASS`
- **Writes to**
  - Offline YAML file (`--offline-yaml`)
  - Online CML controller state (labs/nodes/links/configs) via `virl2_client.ClientLibrary`
- **Calls into**
  - `jinja2` (render templates)
  - `virl2_client` (online API)
  - `src/topogen/dnshost.py` (`dnshostconfig()`)
  - `src/topogen/lxcfrr.py` (`lxcfrr_bootconfig()`)
  - `src/topogen/models.py` (TopogenNode/Interface models)

### `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (Jinja render step)
- **Reads from**
  - Jinja context (commonly `config`, `node`, plus feature flags)
- **Writes to**
  - Startup-config text embedded into offline YAML, or pushed to the controller (online)
- **Calls into**
  - None (template-only)

### `src/topogen/config.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (loads config)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (uses config values)
  - `src/topogen/dnshost.py` (uses config values)
- **Reads from**
  - `config.toml` (or `--config` path)
- **Writes to**
  - `config.toml` when `--write` / `Config.save()` is used
- **Calls into**
  - `serde.toml` (`from_toml`, `to_toml`)

### `src/topogen/models.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (`TopogenError`)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (TopogenNode/Interface/CoordsGenerator)
  - `src/topogen/dnshost.py` (DNShost/TopogenNode)
- **Reads from**
  - None
- **Writes to**
  - None
- **Calls into**
  - None (pure dataclasses/types)

### `src/topogen/dnshost.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/render.py`
- **Reads from**
  - Jinja context data (`Config`, `TopogenNode`, list of `DNShost` entries)
- **Writes to**
  - Returns a boot script string (DNS host config)
- **Calls into**
  - `jinja2` (renders the inline template)

### `src/topogen/gui.py`

- **Called by**
  - Console script `topogen-gui` (`pyproject.toml`)
- **Reads from**
  - CLI args via `sys.argv` (Gooey populates argv)
  - Optional dependency: `gooey`
- **Writes to**
  - stdout/stderr (errors when Gooey is not installed)
- **Calls into**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (`create_argparser()`, `main()`)

## Offline vs online

- **Offline** (`--offline-yaml out\lab.yaml`):
  - No controller needed.
  - Produces a YAML you import into CML.
  - `out\` is gitignored by default; in some environments tools/assistants may not be able to read generated artifacts, so validate via terminal search (e.g., PowerShell `Select-String`) rather than asking a tool to open the file.

- **Online** (no `--offline-yaml`):
  - Requires controller env vars (typical):
    - `VIRL2_URL`
    - `VIRL2_USER`
    - `VIRL2_PASS`
  - Uses `--insecure` if your controller TLS cert is not trusted.

## Gooey (GUI) notes

TopoGen has an optional GUI wrapper that reuses the CLI.

- Install:
  - `pip install -e ".[gui]"`
- Run:
  - `topogen-gui`

How it works:

- `src/topogen/gui.py` imports Gooey late (so normal CLI usage does not require Gooey).
- Gooey uses the same argparse definition by calling `topogen.main.create_argparser(parser_class=GooeyParser)`.
- The GUI then calls the normal CLI `topogen.main.main()`.

Common gotchas:

- If you installed TopoGen non-editable, reinstall after local changes:
  - `python -m pip install .`
- If you installed editable, code changes are picked up automatically:
  - `python -m pip install -e .`
  - or for GUI: `python -m pip install -e ".[gui]"`
- If online mode fails with no output, rerun with `-l DEBUG`.

## Where to implement features

Rule of thumb:

- **New CLI flag**: `src/topogen/main.py` (argparse)
- **Topology behavior / when to apply config**: `src/topogen/render.py`
- **Config lines emitted**: `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
- **New per-node data fields**: `src/topogen/models.py`
- **Config.toml default / parsing**: `src/topogen/config.py`

## How to validate changes

Offline (recommended first pass):

- Generate an offline YAML under `out\` (gitignored).
- Validate by searching the generated YAML/config text (PowerShell examples):
  - `Select-String -Path out\*.yaml -Pattern "eigrp stub connected summary"`
  - `Select-String -Path out\*.yaml -Pattern "router eigrp"`
  - `Select-String -Path out\*.yaml -Pattern "tunnel mode gre multipoint"`

Online (basic smoke checks once routers boot):

- Routing:
  - `show ip route`
  - `show ip eigrp neighbors` (if using EIGRP)
- DMVPN (if applicable):
  - `show dmvpn`
  - `show ip nhrp`
- Config presence:
  - `show run | include eigrp stub`

## Git workflow for this repo

- Branch naming:
  - `feat/<short-name>` for features
  - `fix/<short-name>` for bugfixes
  - `docs/<short-name>` for documentation-only changes
- Workflow:
  - Keep changes incremental (one feature per branch/PR).
  - Prefer squash-merge to keep history clean.
  - After merge: sync `main` locally and delete the feature branch.
- Interaction preference:
  - AIs/assistants can propose exact commands; you run them and share output.

## Feature closeout checklist

See the README checklist and follow it for any change that affects behavior:

- [Feature closeout checklist](README.md#feature-closeout-checklist-required)

Commit message:

docs: clarify template/device-template pitfall and doc drift rule

developer.md, after:

# Developer notes

This file is a developer-oriented starting point for TopoGen.

## Quick start (skim)

- If you are new here, read:
  - `README.md` (user-facing behavior and examples)
  - `developer.md` (this file)
- Core flow (where to look first):
  - CLI flags: `src/topogen/main.py`
  - Topology + rendering behavior: `src/topogen/render.py`
  - Device configs: `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
- Validate changes:
  - Prefer offline first: generate `--offline-yaml out\<lab>.yaml` and search output with PowerShell `Select-String`.
  - Then (if needed) boot in CML and run basic show commands (see “How to validate changes”).

## What TopoGen is

TopoGen is a Python CLI tool that generates CML labs:

- **Online**: creates labs/nodes/links on a CML controller via the PCL (`virl2-client`).
- **Offline**: writes a CML YAML lab file locally with `--offline-yaml`.

It also renders per-node startup-configs using **Jinja2 templates**.

Terminology:

- `-T` / `--template`: which config template to render (`src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`)
- `--device-template`: which CML node definition to use (e.g., `iosv`, `csr1000v`)

Pitfall:

- In general, keep the config template (`-T`) aligned with the device template (`--device-template`). For example, using an IOSv config template on a CSR1000v node definition can result in wrong interface names or unsupported config at boot.

## Authoritative sources of truth

- `src/topogen/render.py`: topology semantics + rendering behavior (authoritative engine)
- `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`: emitted device configuration (what nodes boot with)
- `README.md`: user-facing CLI contract and examples
- `CHANGES.md`: what changed between released versions
- `TODO.md`: in-progress ideas/roadmap (not guaranteed implemented)

## Runtime dependencies (from `pyproject.toml`)

Required:

- `jinja2` (template rendering)
- `virl2-client` (CML controller API client for online mode)
- `pyserde[toml]` (read/write `config.toml`)
- `networkx` (topology logic in some modes)
- `enlighten` (progress bars)

Optional:

- `gooey` (GUI entrypoint)

## Repository layout (what matters)

Required to run:

- `pyproject.toml`
- `src/topogen/`
  - `__init__.py` (package entrypoint exposure)
  - `main.py` (CLI parsing, dispatch)
  - `render.py` (authoritative topology + rendering engine)
  - `config.py` (config model + load/save)
  - `models.py` (dataclasses + `TopogenError`)
  - `templates/` (all `*.jinja2` templates)

Nice to have:

- `README.md` (user docs)
- `CHANGES.md` (release notes)
- `TODO.md` (roadmap)
- `.github/workflows/` (CI)
- `.images/` (demo assets)
- `CONTRIBUTING.md` (contributor workflow)

## Entry points

Defined in `pyproject.toml`:

- `topogen = topogen:main`
- `topogen-gui = topogen.gui:main`

These resolve through `src/topogen/__init__.py` and then into the real logic:

- CLI: `src/topogen/main.py:main()`
- GUI: `src/topogen/gui.py:main()` (wraps the same CLI parsing and then calls `topogen.main.main()`)

## High-level dependency chain (call graph)

When you run `topogen ...`:

1. `src/topogen/main.py`
   - Parses args (argparse)
   - Loads config via `src/topogen/config.py` (`Config.load()`)
   - Selects the topology mode and template
   - Calls into `src/topogen/render.py` (`Renderer`) for online or offline generation

2. `src/topogen/render.py`
   - Builds nodes/links + addressing
   - Loads templates from `src/topogen/templates/` (package resources)
   - Renders per-node configs using Jinja2
   - Either:
     - writes offline YAML, or
     - uses `virl2_client.ClientLibrary` to create/update the lab on a controller

3. `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
   - Produce IOS/IOS-XE configs based on the passed Jinja context (`config`, `node`, and feature flags)

## AI onboarding prompt (copy/paste)

Paste this into a fresh AI session to get it oriented quickly:

```text
You are working in the TopoGen repo (Python 3.12+). Start by reading developer.md.

Goal: implement a small feature or bugfix without breaking existing modes.

Key flow:
- CLI entrypoint: src/topogen/main.py
- Authoritative topology + rendering: src/topogen/render.py
- Device configs: src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2

When adding a feature:
1) add/modify CLI flags in main.py
2) pass the flag into render.py logic and into the Jinja context
3) implement emitted config lines in the relevant template(s)
4) update README.md + CHANGES.md
5) validate with an offline YAML lab and (if applicable) an online controller run

Use the “File pointers” section in developer.md to understand what each file reads/writes/calls.
```

## AI guardrails (default boundaries)

Unless a task explicitly requires otherwise:

- Prefer editing:
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (CLI flags + wiring)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (behavior + Jinja context)
  - `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2` (emitted device config)
  - Docs: `README.md`, `CHANGES.md`, `developer.md`

- Avoid editing (high blast radius) unless asked:
  - `pyproject.toml` (dependencies, entrypoints, packaging metadata)
  - `src/topogen/__init__.py` (entrypoint exposure)
  - `.github/workflows/*` (CI behavior)
  - `.gitignore` (what artifacts get committed)

- Never commit generated artifacts:
  - `out\` (gitignored offline YAML outputs)

## Common tasks -> file chain (LLM-friendly)

- **Add a new CLI flag**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (argparse)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (consume the flag + pass into Jinja context)
  - `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2` (emit config)
  - Docs: `README.md`, `CHANGES.md`

- **Change how addressing/topology is computed**
  - `src/topogen/render.py`
  - `src/topogen/models.py` (only if new per-node/per-link fields are needed)
  - Docs: `README.md` (if user-visible)

- **Change device config text (without changing topology logic)**
  - `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (only if you need to add context variables)

- **Change online (controller) behavior**
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (calls `virl2_client`)
  - Docs: `README.md` (env vars / flags)

- **Change config.toml defaults/parsing**
  - `src/topogen/config.py`
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (wire flags like `--config`, `--write`)

## File pointers (called-by / reads-from / writes-to / calls-into)

The intent of this section is to reduce guesswork.

If this file and the code disagree, treat the code as authoritative and update `developer.md` in the same PR.

- For an **AI**, these pointers help answer: “Where do I edit, and what else must I touch?”
- For a **human**, these pointers help answer: “What are the side effects and blast radius of a change?”

### `src/topogen/__init__.py`

- **Called by**
  - Console scripts via `pyproject.toml` entrypoints (`topogen = topogen:main`)
- **Reads from**
  - Package metadata via `importlib.metadata.metadata("topogen")`
- **Writes to**
  - None
- **Calls into**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (exports `main`)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (exports `Renderer`)
  - `src/topogen/config.py` (exports `Config`)

### `src/topogen/main.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/__init__.py` (entrypoint export)
  - `src/topogen/gui.py` (GUI wrapper)
- **Reads from**
  - `config.toml` (or `--config`) via `Config.load()`
  - Environment variables (direct): `LOG_LEVEL`
- **Writes to**
  - stdout/stderr (logging)
  - Delegates offline YAML / online controller changes to `render.py`
- **Calls into**
  - `src/topogen/config.py` (`Config`)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (`Renderer`, `get_templates()`)
  - `src/topogen/models.py` (`TopogenError`)

### `src/topogen/render.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/main.py`
- **Reads from**
  - Packaged templates in `src/topogen/templates/` (via `topogen.templates` package resources)
  - `Config` values (IP pools, credentials, domain)
  - Online controller auth (indirectly via `virl2-client` / environment): `VIRL2_URL`, `VIRL2_USER`, `VIRL2_PASS`
- **Writes to**
  - Offline YAML file (`--offline-yaml`)
  - Online CML controller state (labs/nodes/links/configs) via `virl2_client.ClientLibrary`
- **Calls into**
  - `jinja2` (render templates)
  - `virl2_client` (online API)
  - `src/topogen/dnshost.py` (`dnshostconfig()`)
  - `src/topogen/lxcfrr.py` (`lxcfrr_bootconfig()`)
  - `src/topogen/models.py` (TopogenNode/Interface models)

### `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (Jinja render step)
- **Reads from**
  - Jinja context (commonly `config`, `node`, plus feature flags)
- **Writes to**
  - Startup-config text embedded into offline YAML, or pushed to the controller (online)
- **Calls into**
  - None (template-only)

### `src/topogen/config.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (loads config)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (uses config values)
  - `src/topogen/dnshost.py` (uses config values)
- **Reads from**
  - `config.toml` (or `--config` path)
- **Writes to**
  - `config.toml` when `--write` / `Config.save()` is used
- **Calls into**
  - `serde.toml` (`from_toml`, `to_toml`)

### `src/topogen/models.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (`TopogenError`)
  - `src/topogen/render.py` (TopogenNode/Interface/CoordsGenerator)
  - `src/topogen/dnshost.py` (DNShost/TopogenNode)
- **Reads from**
  - None
- **Writes to**
  - None
- **Calls into**
  - None (pure dataclasses/types)

### `src/topogen/dnshost.py`

- **Called by**
  - `src/topogen/render.py`
- **Reads from**
  - Jinja context data (`Config`, `TopogenNode`, list of `DNShost` entries)
- **Writes to**
  - Returns a boot script string (DNS host config)
- **Calls into**
  - `jinja2` (renders the inline template)

### `src/topogen/gui.py`

- **Called by**
  - Console script `topogen-gui` (`pyproject.toml`)
- **Reads from**
  - CLI args via `sys.argv` (Gooey populates argv)
  - Optional dependency: `gooey`
- **Writes to**
  - stdout/stderr (errors when Gooey is not installed)
- **Calls into**
  - `src/topogen/main.py` (`create_argparser()`, `main()`)

## Offline vs online

- **Offline** (`--offline-yaml out\lab.yaml`):
  - No controller needed.
  - Produces a YAML you import into CML.
  - `out\` is gitignored by default; in some environments tools/assistants may not be able to read generated artifacts, so validate via terminal search (e.g., PowerShell `Select-String`) rather than asking a tool to open the file.

- **Online** (no `--offline-yaml`):
  - Requires controller env vars (typical):
    - `VIRL2_URL`
    - `VIRL2_USER`
    - `VIRL2_PASS`
  - Uses `--insecure` if your controller TLS cert is not trusted.

## Gooey (GUI) notes

TopoGen has an optional GUI wrapper that reuses the CLI.

- Install:
  - `pip install -e ".[gui]"`
- Run:
  - `topogen-gui`

How it works:

- `src/topogen/gui.py` imports Gooey late (so normal CLI usage does not require Gooey).
- Gooey uses the same argparse definition by calling `topogen.main.create_argparser(parser_class=GooeyParser)`.
- The GUI then calls the normal CLI `topogen.main.main()`.

Common gotchas:

- If you installed TopoGen non-editable, reinstall after local changes:
  - `python -m pip install .`
- If you installed editable, code changes are picked up automatically:
  - `python -m pip install -e .`
  - or for GUI: `python -m pip install -e ".[gui]"`
- If online mode fails with no output, rerun with `-l DEBUG`.

## Where to implement features

Rule of thumb:

- **New CLI flag**: `src/topogen/main.py` (argparse)
- **Topology behavior / when to apply config**: `src/topogen/render.py`
- **Config lines emitted**: `src/topogen/templates/*.jinja2`
- **New per-node data fields**: `src/topogen/models.py`
- **Config.toml default / parsing**: `src/topogen/config.py`

## How to validate changes

Offline (recommended first pass):

- Generate an offline YAML under `out\` (gitignored).
- Validate by searching the generated YAML/config text (PowerShell examples):
  - `Select-String -Path out\*.yaml -Pattern "eigrp stub connected summary"`
  - `Select-String -Path out\*.yaml -Pattern "router eigrp"`
  - `Select-String -Path out\*.yaml -Pattern "tunnel mode gre multipoint"`

Online (basic smoke checks once routers boot):

- Routing:
  - `show ip route`
  - `show ip eigrp neighbors` (if using EIGRP)
- DMVPN (if applicable):
  - `show dmvpn`
  - `show ip nhrp`
- Config presence:
  - `show run | include eigrp stub`

## Git workflow for this repo

- Branch naming:
  - `feat/<short-name>` for features
  - `fix/<short-name>` for bugfixes
  - `docs/<short-name>` for documentation-only changes
- Workflow:
  - Keep changes incremental (one feature per branch/PR).
  - Prefer squash-merge to keep history clean.
  - After merge: sync `main` locally and delete the feature branch.
- Interaction preference:
  - AIs/assistants can propose exact commands; you run them and share output.

## Feature closeout checklist

See the README checklist and follow it for any change that affects behavior:

- [Feature closeout checklist](README.md#feature-closeout-checklist-required)
